---
layout: post
title:  "Matchish: an Exercise in Implementing Pattern Matching in Ruby"
date:   2015-07-18 20:30:00
categories: ruby experiments
comments: true
---
## Short Preface

Many years ago, when I considered myself a C++ expert (which was
presumptous yet excusable for 19 yrs), I've liked to think something like
"My language is the most powerful and expressive in entire world! I can
implement literally **any** other language's feature with my templates and
operator redefinitions and ..."

Now, being Ruby developer in my mid-30s, I became much more pragmatic,
but still curious (and sometimes envious) about other languages and with
passion to experiments like "what can we do to have this
Erlang/Scala/Rust/you-name-it cool thing in our everyday code?"

So, here is one of those exercises: taking the whole idea of "pattern
matching" from functional languages and seeing, how we can make use of
it.

## What is Pattern Matching?

> In computer science, pattern matching is the act of checking a given
sequence of tokens for the presence of the constituents of some pattern.
([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_matching))

Not sounding really cool?

In practice of languages like Haskell, [there is](https://www.haskell.org/tutorial/patterns.html)
a very powerful tool, allowing, in particular:

* checking values against complex patterns (like "list consisting of
  element, then several, then exactly the same element");
* decomposition of values (after checking list agains `(x:xs)` pattern
  you can immediately work with "x" variable, having matched element;
* code execution dispatching by patters (you can have several defintions
  of function for different "argument patterns");
* guards, which are not only check data _structure_ but also can perform
  any checks on value (`x < 15`).

Read about Haskell pattern matching. It's seriously mind-blowing.

## Ruby Has (Sort Of) Pattern Matching

### Three Equality Signs

Not everyone is aware of power of `#===` operator. In official
documentation it is [named](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.2.2/Object.html#method-i-3D-3D-3D)
"case equality operator" (suggesting typical, but not only, use) and you
implicitly use it in your everyday code:

{% highlight ruby %}
x = 6.0

case x
when (1..5) # calls Range#===(x), which returns true if (1..5).cover?(x)
when Fixnum # calls Class#===(x), which returns true if x.kind_of?(Fixnum)
when /foo/  # calls Regexp#===(x), which returns true if x =~ /foo/
when "foo"  # calls default Object#===(x), which is just an alias for ==
when ->(x){x > 5} # calls Proc#===(x), which returns true if call(x) returns true
end
{% endhighlight %}

You can also define `#===` for your class and have very complicated
checks inside `case`.

This is hell of close to pattern matching. I'm constantly finding myself
using this feature exactly for **dispatching**. It is not as cool as method
overloading, yet concise enough:

{% highlight ruby %}
def parse(value)
  case value
  when /^\d+$/
    parse_int(value)
  when /^"([^"]+)"$/
    parse_string_literal(value)
  #...
  end
end

# or
def output_to_logs(value)
  case value
  when /^ERROR(.+)$/
    log.error $1
  when Numeric
    log.warn "Number value %.2f" % value
  when Exception
    log.error "#{value.class}: #{value.message}"
  when String
    log.info value
  # ...
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

It is less known that `#===` method also used in `grep`:

{% highlight ruby %}
[1,nil,2,'test'].grep(Numeric) # => [1,2]
{% endhighlight %}

And in fact for many tasks like parsing and evaluating complex contexts
you can store your own array of heterogenous patterns and check some
values against them.

But it is only a part of "pattern matching" puzzle.

### Argument Decomposition in Expressions

Ruby definitely **has** some of decomposing-values-by-pattern features:

{% highlight ruby %}
a, b = [1,2,3] # a == 1, b == 2, the rest is lost
a, *b = [1,2,3] # a == 1, b == [2,3]
a, (b,c), *d = [[1,2], [3,4], [5,6], [7,8]] # a == [1,2], b == 3, c == 4, d == [[5,6],[7,8]]
{% endhighlight %}

It is extremely useful for method/block arguments. When we are talking
about Ruby 2.2, we also have `**args` for arguments, catching hashes,
and keyword arguments, deconstructing them. Unfortunately, in other
places you can't has it:

{% highlight ruby %}
a, **b = [1, {test: 'me'}] # SyntaxError
{% endhighlight %}

Even more unfortunately, decomposition in expressions have nothing in
common with `#===`, so, you can't do anything like

{% highlight ruby %}
list = [1,2,3]
case list
when [1, *rest] # undefined local variable or method `rest'
  p rest # you'd like to have [2,3] here... but ↑
end
{% endhighlight %}

### Regexps

Regexps are different. They are patterns. The can `#===`, as we've seen
before. They also can decompose:

{% highlight ruby %}
'test' =~ /(.+)st/
$1 # => 'te'

# or, without nasty globals:
Regexp.last_match[1] # 'te'

# or, more Ruby-ish way
m = /(.+)st/.match('test')
m[1] # 'te'

# or, like it's 2015 already
m = /(?<somename>.+)st/.match('test')
m['somename'] # 'te'
{% endhighlight %}

You can think of them as a separate sub-language inside Ruby, which can
be in no use outside the domain of string checking. Yet regexps can learn
us a lesson of how **could** matching+decomposition look in Ruby.

### RSpec Matchers

They are used, well, for specs and inside framework. But, in fact, many
RSpec matchers are complicated patterns for compound types. Like this:

{% highlight ruby %}
# Fortunately, matchers are smart enough to implement ===
array_including(1) === [1,2,3]  # => true
hash_including(test: instance_of(String)) === {test: 'me'} # => true
{% endhighlight %}

That's cool. Really, seriously cool and very Ruby-way. In fact, you can
try it right now:

{% highlight ruby %}
x = [1,2,3]

case x
when array_including(instance_of(Fixnum), 2)
  # ....
end
{% endhighlight %}

And it just works! I am, in fact, puzzled that we are not seeing more and
more of this in real life code (or, I rather not; skip to "Being Pragmatic"
section if you want to know why).

Yet those cool matchers still lack "decomposition" of values into variables.
(To be fair, it's not needed in context they are used today.)

So, we need to go deeper.

## Implementing Missing Features

There [is](https://github.com/egison/egison-ruby)
[several](https://github.com/k-tsj/pattern-match)
[attempts](https://github.com/jdantonio/functional-ruby) to bring pattern
matching in Ruby.

For me, all of them (looking pretty similar) are missing the point. They
are trying to invent some DSL, mimicing existing pattern-matching languages.
Yet, IMO, pattern matching is not some "domain", it's rather basic language
feature. So, the "**domain**-specific language" attempt to it is doomed by
design.

Let's try to invent solution, defined by next requirements:

* it should play well with existing Ruby quasi-pattern-matching features:
  `case`, `grep`, `#===`;
* it should not pollute global namespace (and monkey-patch core classes)
  with lot of "cool inventions";
* it should be some "opt-in" solution, which you can use in 2-3 places in
  your code (not changing anything else) and everything should just work,
  and just stay readable, not implying some "new paradigm"
* providing all the cool features of deep matching, values decomposition,
  value guards and more.

So, meet [matchish](http://github.com/zverok/matchish). For now, it is
NOT a gem, but rather an attempt to show the way. If you are wondering why
I'm not over-enthusiastic over matchish acceptance, please read "Being
Pragmatic" section.

### Types Being Algebraic

**Task**: treat any Ruby object as "algebraic" data type, which allows to
check its deep inside structure.

**Solution**: At first, I assumed something like RSpec's
[argument matchers](https://www.relishapp.com/rspec/rspec-mocks/v/2-7/docs/argument-matchers/general-matchers),
like `any`, `array_including(...)`, `instance_of(...)` and so on. But
for "core language feature" it seemed to be too verbose and not very
"guessable". So, current solution looks like this:

{% highlight ruby %}
require 'matchish/matchers'

# normal Ruby behavior
Object === 1 # => true
[1, 2, 3] === [1, 2, 3] # => true

# Method #matchish converts any object to pattern
# exactly the same as above:
Object.matchish === 1 # => true
[1, 2, 3].matchish === [1, 2, 3] # => true

# ...but the patterns are powerful and extensible:
# check object attribute:
String.matchish.with(length: 4) === 'test' # => true
# or call object method:
Array.matchish.which(include?: 1) === [3,2,1] # => true

# deep check with `===` for nested objects
[1, 2, Numeric].matchish === [1, 2, 3] # => true
# or even:
[1, *Numeric.matchish].matchish == [1, 2, 3] # => true

# shorter version, yet without including entire module, is also available:
require 'matchish/ma'

Array.ma.which(include?: 1) === [3,2,1] # => true
Array.ma.which(include?: 1) === [4,5,6] # => false

# Aaaaand even shorter, for fun:
require 'matchish/m'

String.m.with(length: 3) === 'wtf' # => true
String.m.with(length: 3) === 'sorry' # => false
{% endhighlight %}

Solution seems pretty straightforward for implementation, you can look
at it in [matchish/matchers](https://github.com/zverok/matchish/blob/master/lib/matchish/matchers.rb).

As it is rather proof-of-concept than library, not all of useful matchers
are implemented.

**Compromise**:

* one (and only one) method `matchish` or `ma` monkey-patched in each object;
* (and it even can be refinement, not patch, in modern Ruby).

**Showcase**:

{% highlight ruby %}
# classic functional list length, just for fun
def length(list)
  case list
  when [Object.m].m
    1
  when [Object.m, *Object.m].m
    1 + length(list[1..-1])
  end
end

length([1,2,3]) # => 3

# Something more interesting:
%w[1980-12-28 1983-02-14 1992-03-30 1998-10-17].
  map(&Time.method(:parse)).
  grep(Time.m.with(month: (2..3)))
# => [1983-02-14 00:00:00 +0300, 1992-03-30 00:00:00 +0300]
{% endhighlight %}

### Values Being Decomposed

**Task**: alongside with matching pattern, store matched values in
variables.

**Solution 1**: strangely beautiful

{% highlight ruby %}
require 'matchish/decompose/bind'

[x = Object.m, x, *Object.m].m === [1,1,2,3] # => true
x.value # => 1

[x = Object.m, x, *Object.m].m === [1,2,3,4] # => false

String.m.with(length: (x = Object.m)) === 'test' # => true
x.value # => 4
{% endhighlight %}

The `.value` part is a bit ugly, but the overall solution looks cute,
for me.

How it's done? `x = any` part is simple variable assignment.
After it, `x` has value of `Matchish::AnyPattern`. After very first comparison
with real value, pattern is "bound" to this value, and all forecoming
comparisons only return `true` if the value is exactly the same.

**NB**: at the moment, I haven't invented elegant solution to name the
splatted part of match (like `y = *any`).

Downside of this approach is you can't save this kind of pattern in the
constant (as it will not know the context of "x", and is usable only
once, after which pattern is "bound").

**Solution 2**: `Regexp`-like

{% highlight ruby %}
require 'matchish/decompose/as'

[Object.m.as(:x), Object.m.as(:x), *Object.m.as(:y)].m === [1,1,2,3] # => true
Matchish.last_match[:x] # => 1
Matchish.last_match[:y] # => [2, 3]

[Object.m.as(:x), Object.m.as(:x), *Object.m].m === [1,2,3,4] # => false
{% endhighlight %}

Looks like "more complex DSL", yet, at the same time, less magic. (By
"less magic", BTW, I mean that there is no need for "how is it done?"
explanation, as any expirienced Ruby programmer reads this as pretty
obvious code.)

**Compromise**: It seems both solutions are mere compromises, each having
its pros and cons. I honestly don't know which is "more Ruby-way". The
first one seems "smarter" while the last is definitely provides less
magic and therefore more usability.

**Showcase**:

{% highlight ruby %}
# For "match" solution: the same "list length" functional style
def length(list)
  case list
  when [Object.m].m
    1
  when [Object.m, *Object.m.as(:tail)].m
    1 + length(Matchish.last_match[:tail])
  end
end

length([1,2,3]) # => 3

# For vars solution: some deep matching
def check(hash)
  if {(key = Symbol.m) => Time.m.with(month: (m = Object.m))}.m === hash
    [key.value, m.value]
  end
end

check(birthday: Time.new(2015, 2, 14))
# => [:birthday, 2]
{% endhighlight %}

### Imperative Inside Functional: Guards

**Task**: Last but not least. Sometimes you are finding yourself writing
code like...

{% highlight ruby %}
case x
when 'something'
  if some_condition
    do_something
  else
    do_something_else
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

...which is not too bad, yet branches inside branches inside branches...
The whole idea around pattern-matching is - let's do the only match, no
branching.

**Solution**:

{% highlight ruby %}
require 'matchish/guard'

x = 10
flag = true

case x
when Fixnum.m.guard{|x| x > 5 && flag}
  p "here"
when Fixnum # other case, without guard
  p "there"
end
{% endhighlight %}

Implementation, again, is pretty straightforward.

## Being Pragmatic

All the examples above are implemented in my [matchish](http://github.com/zverok/matchish)
repository and working. But currently I'm not releasing this "matchish"
as a gem (and therefore, not tried to make it feature-full: for ex.,
of all possible RSpec-like matchers only several necessary for showcase
were implemented).

Why?

Look, I've invented matchish and tried to use it when working on a parser
project (unreleased yet) -- that's the domain where pattern matching should
definitely be in use. And there was hard lesson learned:

**All in all, powerful pattern matching need to be core language feature**.

That's because of:

* **natural look**: the more I've used "cool" matchish feature, the more was
  fear of other developers being puzzled or disgusted with code... it
  became "extraterrastrial" a bit;
* more important: **speed, optimization, overhead**; it became really easy
  to write "clever" algorithm implementation in some small method, then
  call it 1000 times and then profiler shows you tons of Matchish objects
  created, dispatching checks furiously while binding complex "matching
  context" and feasting with your memory and CPU time;
* even more important: after all the considerations, it now seems for
  me that **pattern matching IS a paradigm**; either you do all the execution
  dispatching through the pattern matched function alternatives, or it
  will always be another (typically, more clear) way to express your
  intentions; the way your language (Ruby) is more naturally support.

Though, it still seems that _some_ incremental enchancements of Ruby
existing "match-y" features will be appreciated by most of us. Personally
I'd be happy to write `case` code with inline decomposition, as shown above:

{% highlight ruby %}
list = [1,2,3]
case list
when [1, *tail]
  p other # => [2,3]
# ...
end
{% endhighlight %}

Also, what about `#===` for types like `Array` and `Hash` using `===`
recursively?

{% highlight ruby %}
# Current Ruby behavior:
[1, 2, 3] === [1, 2, 3] # => true
[1, Numeric, Numeric] === [1, 2, 3] # => false, but I want true!
{% endhighlight %}

## P.S. How I Did This Article

As I wanted just to "show the point", I didn't want to write extensive
specifications for weeks, then updating them, and only THEN writing
an article.

But as I wanted to **show** the point, I've need some tool to check at
least all code I've written for article (before writing an implementation,
BTW :) will work.

So, I've used so-called "readme-driven development" approach (using
your readme as a specification) and tool [dokaz](http://github.com/zverok/dokaz)
helping to enforce this approach (ok, it's shameless self-promotion,
as I'm the author of the tool).

So, at the time I writing this paragraph, I only need to run
`bundle exec dokaz Article.md` and look what it outputs.
