---
layout: post
title:  'MiniTest is not "Just Ruby", it is "Just Rails"'
date:   2016-10-09 18:02:00
categories: ruby rants
comments: true
---

[MiniTest](https://github.com/seattlerb/minitest) recently have gained a
lot of love and respect from Ruby community, as a "less magical" alternative
to [RSpec](http://rspec.info/) (which is, apparently, "too complicated"
for nowadays rubyists). The one quote proudly cited on each MiniTest
release email, and in its README, is

> rspec is a testing DSL. minitest is ruby.
> (Adam Hawkins, ["Bow Before MiniTest"](https://speakerdeck.com/ahawkins/bow-before-minitest))

(And the next slide explicitly says: "RSpec: less code & more magic;
MiniTest: more code & less magic".)

Let's study this statement to understand what is _good_ Ruby and what is
_Ruby way_—and how it is different from _Rails way_.

## Ways we solve tasks

Let's forget for a moment about testing frameworks and their features and
just solve the task from scratch:

**We want to define "tests". Each of them is set of ruby commands + phrase
describing them. After definition, each of them would be performed, and
descriptions used to print output.**

For Rubyist accustomed to write idiomatic Ruby code, this requirements
naturally lead to some mini-DSL:

```ruby
define_test "This is the phase describing test" do
  # test's code itself
end
```

This is exactly what RSpec does: solves the task in most unambiguous,
idiomatic and readable way possible:

```ruby
it "performs some set of really complex actions" do
  # test's code
end
```

When you see it, you can immediatly have a good guess of what it does and
how it is implemented, and you'll be pretty close to reality.

But then, somebody comes and says "DSL's are bad! It is like language
inside language you need to study. It is Unholy Black Magic!" And comes with
"pure-Ruby, no DSL" solution:

```ruby
def test_performs_some_set_of_really_complex_actions
  # test's code
end
```

Or is it? Don't you see DSL here too? But it _is_ here. Let me show you.
Slowly.

```ruby
def  test_performs_some_set_of_really_complex_actions
      it "performs some set of really complex actions"
#     ^  |         ^
#     1  |         2
```

In both cases, you can't write anything else instead of (1)—so, it is
part of "test framework language". And (2) is description you provide,
it can be anything, it is a parameter.

So, what is the difference?

RSpec uses Ruby language structures to designate parts of "test
definition language", which helps to write, read and validate code. Try
writing `ti "performs something"` and you'll be stopped early by interpreter,
even before tests would run. Want to write test which would be described
like `"checks 1:N validation (or similar)"`? You just write it.

MiniTest pretends to be "just Ruby, nothing new!", but it is the same
DSL, just the fact is hidden from your eyes—with some really bad
consequences. Try writing `tset_peforms_something`, it is still absolutely
"valid" code, just the test would be ignored silently. Try to describe your
test with a string that includes any symbol not allowed for method name, and
you are screwed.

(For everyone yelling "but we have MiniSpec" at this moment—please, refer to
[discussion of this fact](#you-cant-beat-them-you-lead-them).)

## Parting the ways

This, really simplistic, example, allows to define some important differences
between two ways of writing in Ruby: let's schematically call them "Ruby
way" and "Rails way":

* "Ruby way" is relying on _all_ language features and embracing them; as
  Matz said, "it is complex language for writing simple code", you _should_
  understand Ruby to read and understand RSpec;
* "Rails way" is using Ruby features underwater, while allowing developer
  to believe "he just writes classes and methods, and everything works";
* For making code clean, simple, and readable, "Ruby way" assumes library
  defines clever combinable atoms you can use in your code;
* ...while "Rails way" assumes library injects some new _convention_ your
  code should confirm to (_convention over configuration_, you know?..
  which, in fact, says, if you want to achieve something, you write kinda
  "independent" code, it should "just follow the convention");
* "Ruby way" praises method-with-block argument as one of the most powerful
  syntax constructs, it is one of the most basic code-as-data constructs
  (yet, I can confirm as a Ruby mentor, hard for newcomers);
* "Rails way" neglects method-as-block argument approach, it is "magic" and
  "not generic enough", I suppose? So, even when Railist really needs to
  pass arbitrary logic to method, he prefers to "go JavaScript":

  ```ruby
  scope :starts_after, ->(date) { where('start_date > ?', date) }
  # this is SO MUCH BETTER RAILS CODE THAN BELOW, RIGHT? RIGHT?
  scope(:starts_after){ |date| where('start_date > ?', date) }
  ```

## On definition of "magic"

Ruby and Rails share the same part of bad reputation of "too much magic",
but recently this question (what is "magic", and what amount of it, whatever
it is, is "too much") became the concern not only outside the community,
but also inside. "MiniTest vs RSpec" debate can be seen as a part "right
amount of magic" debate too.

Most of the recent in-community definitions of "too much magic" seem
to focus on neglecting and disgusting natural block-based DSLs, while
praising "just plain object and methods" approach.

Yet, what is "magic", seriously? Magic is _unexpected consequences of
simple actions_. You say "Avada Kedavra" while doing some gesture with a
wooden stick, and Sirius Black dies—that's magic. But if you pull a
trigger, trigger causes chemical reaction, which pushes out the bullet,
and _then_ Sirius Black dies—it is not the magic, it is engineering,
despite of the fact how "magical" it seems for unsuspecting barbarian.

So, let's use the same simplistic yet real example:

```ruby
it "is engineering, seriously" do
  expect(trigger.pull).to eq("fire")
end
```

What and where is here?.. `it(description) { ... }` is testing construction,
which is simple and readable: method, accepting a string and a block;
probably it adds test to internal list of tests to do (yep, it does).

`expect(whatever).to` probably wraps value into something that is easy
to test with other tests (exactly what it does). And `eq` produces some
object/matcher?..

I'd suppose it is something defining `===` generic test method + some
additional services to output pretty strings when test is failed? (correct)

Now, let's go to that "just plain Ruby, no DSL" thing:

```ruby
def test_if_it_is_engineering
  assert_equal trigger.pull, "fire"
end
```

What do you think when you see a method named this way?.. It is just a
method definition.

Ah! If you are inside MiniTest context, there is a <s>magic</s> convention
for this kind of method to have a special meaning (because it starts with
`test_`, you can't guess from code itself it is so special, PURE MAGIC).

Then, this `assert_equal` thing... It is not THAT worse than `expect().to eq`,
I just never able to properly remember what is "expected" and what is
"actual" part of those two arguments... But yeah, cool, there is "no magic!".
Unless you want to define your own assertion/matcher with pretty messages,
which could lead you to real Narnia in MiniTest case.

## You can't beat them, you lead them

When MiniTest founds itself significantly less expressive than RSpec, it
introduces "minitest/spec", which looks exactly like RSpec, but is better
somehow. How?.. Ah, it is still "good clean less-magic MiniTest!" And
it is less magic how exactly?..

Let's investigate how the overall structure works

```ruby
class Foo
end

# that's rspec
describe Foo do
  p [self, self.name]
  # => [RSpec::ExampleGroups::Foo, "RSpec::ExampleGroups::Foo"]
  # it is just a class, with pretty explainable name
end

# and that's minitest/spec
describe Foo do
  p [self, self.name]
  # => [#<Class:0x991a31c>, "Foo"]
  # ok, guessing by name, it is original Foo class that all tests are injected are?..
  p self == Foo
  # => false
  # nope.
  # phew, what kind of world is it?..
  p self.method(:name).source_location
  # => ["/media/storage/home/zverok/.rvm/gems/ruby-2.2.4/gems/minitest-5.9.1/lib/minitest/spec.rb", 272]
  # Ah, ok. It is just your usual "just plain Ruby, no magic" thing, that
  # pretends current class is named the way it is NOT named in fact.
end
```

Here, I've managed to formulate MiniTest/spec motto for you:

**We don't always DSL, but when we do, it is magic!**

Let's look at matchers, probably?..

```ruby
# RSpec, 2016
expect(page).to have_content("bar")
# -> no pollution of tested class, just a DSL of "expect + matcher"
#    `expect().to` part is default; `have_content` is matcher's name,
#    in any "how to create matcher" guide you know how it is defined

# MiniTest/Spec, 2016
page.must_have_content 'bar'
# -> looks familiar, right? really like RSpec 2+, which polluted everything
#    with its methods... and was retired 2.5 years ago
```

Whoops...

The answer is simple: "Rails way" (which MiniTest closely follows) is
"let's not be replaced with superceding technology, let's imitate it
while stating we are superior". While this imitation can't follow the
original too close, MiniTest's imitation of RSpec feature will always
be in "chasing the leader" state.

And, truth to be told, minitest also recommends this Really Cool Replacement,
[Minitest::MatchersVaccine](https://github.com/rmm5t/minitest-matchers_vaccine),
the name is explained as "Adds matcher support to minitest without
all the other RSpec-style expectation infections." This gem last updated
May 31, 2016... you know, only 2 years after RSpec 3 introduced and
promoted non-"infecting" matchers... which was three monthes before
"MatchersVaccine" project have ever _started_.

Yet "MatchersVaccine" fights, somehow, not with "MiniTest implementation
of matchers", but with "RSpec approach to matchers", which does NOT even
here currently; but it easier to fight dehumanized "enemy" (Bad RSpec Guys)
than friends (Those MiniTest Guys, who intorduced their faulty matchers).

## That's just Rails way

One of MiniTest-praise [definitive article](http://brandonhilkert.com/blog/7-reasons-why-im-sticking-with-minitest-and-fixtures-in-rails/)
you can easily google around, states, alongside other things, as a
separate important section:

> 7\. Deviating from Rails defaults doesn’t always provide value

Yeah, that's the (Ruby) world we are living in: "what is good enough
for Rails, should be good enough for Ruby". But, in fact, this is
just plain wrong.

There are two separate ways, and the fact that Rails are written in Ruby,
is, to be honest, unfortunate incident. Ruby still **can and should** praise Rails
for its current popularity, but the ways just **are and should** be
different.
