---
layout: post
title:  "TimeMath: ActiveSupport envy vs good selection of atomic concepts"
date:   2016-06-27 18:44
categories: ruby gems
comments: true
---

When I've started to design [time_math2](https://github.com/zverok/time_math2)
gem, I've already had a strong set of opinions in my head, of why and
how it should be done. Like:
* concise set of well-defined operators for math arithmetics, easy to
  comprehend and remember;
* no invasion into Ruby core classes;
* code using TimeMath should be readable, unambiguous and short.

As for me, I've managed to achieve this for simpe operations from the
very beginning:

```ruby
TimeMath.day.floor(Time.now) # => current midnight
TimeMath.day.advance(Time.now, 4) # => 4 days since now
#... and so on.
```

But, it turned out, typical math arithmetics code frequently require
several consequtive operations, like "2 hours and 5 minutes before current
midnight". Also, "amount of time to add to something" turned out to
be useful abstraction.

And in those cases TimeMath were still much more verbose (in a bad way!
verbosity is not always a drawback) than ActiveSupport's `Time.now.midinight + 1.hour`
and similar stuff.

In chase of ActiveSupport-alike expressiveness, I've made several false
moves in previous version:

* added `TimeMath::Span` simple object, with usage like
  `TimeMath.day.span(4).before(Time.now)`;
* as a last resort for desperates, added optional `core_ext.rb`, now
  allowing `Time.now.advance_by(:day, 2)`.

Both steps were obviously false and superfluous, adding several ways of
do the same with methods with different names:

```ruby
TimeMath.day.advance(Time.now, 1)
TimeMath.day.span(1).after(Time.now)
Time.now.advance_by(:day, 1)
```

Okay, ActiveSupport tends to allow itself in all kind of "useful friendly
methods", with all of `midnight`, `beginning_of_week` and others, but
we can do better! Or so I hope.

So, let me introduce you to **time math operation**. It is:

* chainable;
* uses exactly the same names and abstraction as atomic operations;
* behaves well in Ruby idiomatics;
* can suite as a value object;
* integrates enchantingly with other innumerous TimeMath abstractions.

Here it is:

**Task:** calculate 10:20 at first day of current month.

**Implementations**:

ActiveSupport (presumably, fix me if I'm wrong):

```ruby
Time.now.beginning_of_month + 10.hours + 20.minutes
```

Cons: readable, but too many core extensions and method names to remember.

Plain atomic ops of `TimeMath`:

```ruby
TimeMath.min.advance(TimeMath.hour.advance(TimeMath.month.floor(Time.now)))
```

Cons: the sense can be grasped, but--it is really un-Ruby-ish, to be honest.

TimeMath chainable operations:

```ruby
TimeMath(Time.now).floor(:month).advance(:hour, 10).advance(:min, 20).call
```

Yes, this is still longer than ActiveSupport version, yet it is chainable,
readable and introduces minimal new concepts (and no core extensions).

The more I've thought about this concept, the more I've liked it. And,
at some point, I've understood this form is also pretty legitimate:

```ruby
op = TimeMath().floor(:month).advance(:hour, 10).advance(:min, 20)
# => #<TimeMath::Op floor(:month).advance(:hour, 10).advance(:min, 20)>

# What now?.. Whatever!
op.call(Time.now)
# or
op.call(Time.parse('2016-06-01'), Time.parse('2016-05-01'), Time.parse('2016-04-01'))
# or -- we have applicable operation here! Isn't it a block?..
[Time.parse('2016-06-01'), Time.parse('2016-05-01'), Time.parse('2016-04-01')].
  map(&op)
```

Do you like it? I, for one, do. (OK, I've designed it, but that's not
the cause, I swear!)

This is legitimate value object, which, without any additional effort,
could be serialized/desirealized with YAML (and, therefore, be an argument
for Sidekiq job, for example). So, you can now with an ease pass concepts
like this ("calculate 10:20 at first-of-month for any argument") wherever
you want.

But, there is more.

When you design a good abstraction you know it by the fact it seduces
your other abstractions in most of the library. Look, how it goes:

```ruby
TimeMath.day
  .sequence(Time.parse('2016-06-01')..Time.parse('2016-06-08'))
  .to_a
# => [2016-06-01 00:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-02 00:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-03 00:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-04 00:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-05 00:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-06 00:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-07 00:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-08 00:00:00 +0300]

# ...and...
# why not?
TimeMath.day
  .sequence(Time.parse('2016-06-01')..Time.parse('2016-06-08'))
  .advance(:hour, 10).to_a
# => [2016-06-01 10:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-02 10:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-03 10:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-04 10:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-05 10:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-06 10:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-07 10:00:00 +0300, 2016-06-08 10:00:00 +0300]
```

Neat, huh?..

So, to the meat. [TimeMath 0.0.5](https://github.com/zverok/time_math2/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#005-2016-06-25)
adds the aforementioned operation object (including addition of it to
[sequences](https://github.com/zverok/time_math2#time-sequence-abstraction))
and abandons any attempt to core_ext'ing Ruby classes (even opt-in ones).

It also adds:

* support for `Date`, previously shamefully absent;
* float/rational advances, yay for the `hour.advance(Time.now, 1/3r)`;
* arbitrary float/ceil, enjoy `hour.floor(Time.now, 3)` (floor to 3-hour
  mark), floats/rationals work too;
* better syntax/semantics for time sequences creation ([thanks Kenn Ejima](https://github.com/zverok/time_math2/issues/2)
  for pointing at problem);
* experimental (yet already pretty cool) time arrays [resampling](https://github.com/zverok/time_math2#resampling);
* hell of cleanup and polishing.

Stay tuned! I feel like I already know how to solve entire `crontab`
case with only 2 more core methods in the gem ;)
