---
layout: post
title:  'You should not implement #to_a for your classes'
date:   2018-02-02
categories: ruby rants
comments: true
---

> Well, occasional reader of this blog is no stranger to strong statements, so here is one more of them.

For a short preface, lets reiterate about one useful Ruby idiom: [Kernel#Array](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.5.0/Kernel.html#method-i-Array) method, a.k.a. "I don't care; it should be an Array!"

If at some point of working with data you have a method that could've received, or returned, both singular value and array of values, and at next point you need to remove this distinction, and have definitely an array, you can do that:

```ruby
Array(1) # => [1]
Array('test') # => ["test"]
Array([1, 2, 3]) # => [1, 2, 3]  -- nothing changed, it is already an array
Array(nil) # => []  -- well... makes sense
```

That's one of the small brilliant pieces of functionality that is easy to overlook, but nice to have, and it follows your intuitions most of the time. `Array(nil)` is a nice touch here, being "less logical" than returning `[nil]`, but in fact more of "what you really wanted" in real life.

But sometimes, this intiutions got broken:

```ruby
val = Time.now
Array(val)
# => [3, 21, 10, 2, 2, 2018, 5, 33, false, "EET"]
```

Ugh... WHAT? The thing is, `Array` method works by first trying `val#to_ary`, and if it doesn't respond, `val#to_a`, which `Time` eventually [implements](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.5.0/Time.html#method-i-to_a).

> **Note**: [here](http://zverok.space/blog/2016-01-18-implicit-vs-expicit.html) is an explanation of `#to_ary` vs `#to_a` difference and its importance.

Which leads us to a valuable lesson:

**Never implement `#to_a` for your class (especially if it is representing value objects), unless it IS a collection.**

## But why?..

I'll ask you this: **what is the semantics of `#to_a`**, if the object is **not a collection**?

Most of the time (like in `Time`'s case) the existence of this method is caused by the fact that Ruby does not have "array vs. tuple" distinction, so it means "convert to some meaningful tuple of internal values."

But for this task, there are no benefits in using "standard" name, as compared to specialized one. There is no situation (at least, I can't imagine one) when you have, say, an array of heterogeneous objects, and you want to call `array.map(&:to_a)` and if one of the objects is instance of `Time`, it is expected and desired to have "list of time components" in its place. It instead means you have some bug (like something returned `Time` when you've expected an array).

Moreover, selection of specialized method name almost always leads to a cleaner design. As an example, I recently run into the same problem when playing with my own [Geo::Coord](https://github.com/zverok/geo_coord) datatype. Being designed closely after `Time`'s design, it used to have `#to_a` method, and return `[lat, lng]`. Again, it didn't play well with `Array()` idiom... So, I decided to rename `#to_a` into .... just `#latlng`.

Which, by the way, advice the existence of symmetric `#lnglat` method, and, indeed, some APIs expect a pair of coordinates in that order. It can be modeled with `to_a(order: :lnglat)` or something like this, but two methods (and NO `#to_a`) seems the cleanest and most discoverable way.

### Q: What about other `#to_<x>` methods?

You may ask: if it is so bad about `#to_a`, should we also abandon `#to_h` or `#to_s` for our value objects? You should not. Because:

* Their semantics is different, and less questionable one.
  * `#to_s` is "how the object would be represented on `puts` and string interpolation."
  * `#to_h`, in those JSON-fueled times, became a useful idiom for "dump entire object into basic data types, while preserving its meaning visible," in fact, a proper and modern replacement for "dump entire object into some tuple."
* Despite the fact `Hash()` method also exists, it is much more restrictive, and it is much harder to imagine code using the idiom "convert any value into hash" while NOT expecting some value objects to be convertible.

### Q: Why does `Time` implement it?

Historical reasons, I believe. At the time of `Time` design (pun is not intended), there was no notion of keyword arguments, or even `key: val` Hash syntax shorthands. So, core classes designed at that dark ages, if they should've been able to be constructed from many values (like `Time` does), just had to accept this long list of values to the constructor. Like `Time` still [does](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.5.0/Time.html#method-c-new), in [several](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.5.0/Time.html#method-c-gm) [different](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.5.0/Time.html#method-c-mktime) [ways](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.5.0/Time.html#method-c-local) -- because with just positional arguments it is hard to design proper constructor from 1 to 10 values.

Therefore, it seem logical and symmetrical to have "deconstruct" method, so that it can be easily constructed back:

```ruby
Time.mktime(*Time.now.to_a)
# => 2018-02-02 06:57:57 +0200
```

The funny thing is to present date time have no keyword arguments constructor, and no `#to_h` method either.

### Q: What other core classes do implement `to_a`?

```ruby
Object.constants.map(&Object.method(:const_get))
  .grep(Class).select { |c| c.instance_methods.include?(:to_a) }
# => [Array, Hash, NilClass, File, Struct, Enumerator, MatchData, Dir, Time, Range, IO, StringIO]
```

Alongside already mentioned `Time`, what stands out here is `Struct`, which is core language base for all value objects... And fall into the same problems with "is it Array" question. But with `Struct` it is even stranger (if you think in "value objects" mindset): it not only implements `#to_a` but also `#each` and includes entire `Enumerable`! So it probably thinks of itself more as a "fancy hash with the dot-key notation" than value object.

Which leads us, by the way, to one more questionable rule:

### Bonus: You should not implement `#each` either (unless it is a collection)

The reasons are the same: what is semantics for "each value in X" if X is not a collection?.. It is pretty vague, and some core classes still demonstrate that:

Quick, from the top of your head, what [IO#each](https://ruby-doc.org/core-1.8.6/IO.html#method-i-each) enumerates?..

OK, most of us already know the answer (lines, which are split by... `$\`, or `$OUTPUT_FIELD_SEPARATOR`, or else what you've passed to the method as a string separator), but _intuitively_ it is neither only possible implementation, nor the most expectable one. Well, it **was** in the age of "scripts" and plaintext, but let's face the truth: this age is far gone, and now "iostream, each (something)" can mean bytes, or Unicode codepoints, or buffer chunks or whatnot. [IO#each_byte](https://ruby-doc.org/core-1.8.6/IO.html#method-i-each_byte) and [IO#each_line(separator)](https://ruby-doc.org/core-1.8.6/IO.html#method-i-each_line) have the same flexibility, and much more readability.

> **Historical note**: `String` used to have `#each` and be `Enumerable` (with the same meaning as for `IO`), but it was rethought, and now we have `#each_<byte,char,codepoint,line>` and no bare `#each`. Which is good.

So, please read Arcency's excellent ["Stop including Enumerable, return Enumerator instead"](https://blog.arkency.com/2014/01/ruby-to-enum-for-enumerator/), and name the method `#each_<something_meaningful>`, and don't `include Enumerable`.

Unless it is a collection.

### Q: But what if it IS a collection?

Then implement `#each`, `include Enumerable` (which will give you free `#to_a`, which, though, you may reimplement more effectively if you need), and also _probably_ implement `#to_ary`, which will give you a bonus of playing well in `*your_collection` context.

> **Side note**: Being bold, I'd even say that `Hash#each` and `#to_a` never felt that comfortable for me. Again, there is hard to imagine the context where `Array({some: 'hash'}) # => [[:some, "hash"]]` would be most expected outcome, and sometimes I feel like `#each_pair # => Enumerator` could suite for a better code than included `Enumerable`. But maybe I am just high on architectural astronautics.
